Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: solubility,
diffusion and osmosis. I shall take the candidate through it, question by question.
Let us begin.
Let us begin. Define a solution and solubility,
and explain why these matter in anaesthesia.
A solution is a homogeneous mixture in which one substance, the solute,
is dissolved uniformly within another, the solvent, at the molecular level,
and solubility is the extent to which a solute will dissolve in a given solvent
under defined conditions.
The solubility of a substance is the maximum amount that will dissolve in a given
quantity of solvent at a particular temperature and pressure,
beyond which the solution is saturated and no more will dissolve.
These concepts matter throughout anaesthesia because so much of what we do involves
substances dissolved in fluids or gases dissolved in blood and tissues.
The solubility of anaesthetic gases and vapours in blood and tissues determines the
speed of induction and recovery and the potency of agents.
The solubility of carbon dioxide and oxygen in blood underlies their carriage and
exchange.
The solubility of drugs governs their formulation,
their distribution and their crossing of membranes.
And the related phenomena of diffusion,
the movement of dissolved substances down concentration gradients, and osmosis,
the movement of water across membranes, govern gas exchange,
fluid distribution and the action of many drugs and fluids.
A secure grasp of solubility, diffusion and osmosis therefore underpins our
understanding of anaesthetic uptake, respiratory gas exchange,
fluid therapy and pharmacology.
So a solution is a solute uniformly dissolved in a solvent,
and solubility is the amount that will dissolve under given conditions,
and these concepts matter because the solubility of gases,
vapours and drugs in blood, tissues and fluids governs anaesthetic uptake,
gas exchange, fluid distribution and drug behaviour.
State Henry's law and its relevance to gases in solution.
Henry's law describes the solubility of a gas in a liquid as a function of its
partial pressure, and it is fundamental to understanding the carriage of
respiratory gases and the uptake of anaesthetic agents.
The law states that, at a constant temperature,
the amount of a gas that dissolves in a given volume of liquid is directly
proportional to the partial pressure of that gas in equilibrium with the liquid.
In other words, doubling the partial pressure of a gas above a liquid doubles the
amount that dissolves in it. The proportionality holds for the dissolved gas that
remains physically in solution, distinct from any that is chemically combined.
The relevance is considerable.
The amount of oxygen physically dissolved in plasma is proportional,
by Henry's law, to the partial pressure of oxygen, which is why dissolved oxygen,
though small, rises with a high inspired oxygen partial pressure and becomes
significant in hyperbaric conditions.
The amount of carbon dioxide dissolved in blood, an important part of its carriage,
similarly depends on its partial pressure. The uptake of anaesthetic vapours into
blood is governed by their partial pressure and their solubility.
Henry's law also explains why gases come out of solution when the pressure falls,
as in decompression sickness, where dissolved nitrogen forms bubbles,
and the effervescence of a depressurised fluid.
So Henry's law states that the amount of a gas dissolved in a liquid is
proportional to its partial pressure at constant temperature,
which underlies the dissolved fractions of oxygen and carbon dioxide in blood,
the uptake of anaesthetic vapours, and the formation of bubbles when pressure
falls, as in decompression sickness.
Explain the solubility coefficients used for gases,
including the partition coefficient.
The solubility of a gas in a liquid is quantified by solubility coefficients,
and for anaesthetic agents the partition coefficient is the most important,
so these terms must be clearly distinguished.
The Bunsen solubility coefficient is the volume of gas,
corrected to standard temperature and pressure,
that dissolves in one volume of liquid at a stated temperature when the partial
pressure of the gas is one atmosphere.
The Ostwald solubility coefficient is the volume of gas that dissolves in one
volume of liquid at the temperature concerned,
and importantly it is independent of pressure, which makes it convenient.
The partition coefficient, most used for anaesthetic agents,
describes the distribution of a substance between two phases in equilibrium — for
instance blood and gas, or oil and gas — and is defined as the ratio of the amount
of the substance in one phase to the amount in the other when the two are in
equilibrium and the partial pressures are equal.
The blood–gas partition coefficient is especially important:
it expresses how the agent distributes between blood and the alveolar gas,
and it determines the speed of induction and recovery.
A low blood–gas coefficient, as for desflurane and nitrous oxide,
means the agent is relatively insoluble in blood,
so the alveolar and hence brain partial pressure rises quickly,
giving rapid onset and offset; a high coefficient, as for older agents,
means greater blood solubility and slower onset.
The oil–gas coefficient correlates with potency.
So gas solubility is expressed by the Bunsen and Ostwald coefficients, and,
for anaesthetic agents, by partition coefficients between phases — the blood–gas
coefficient determining speed of onset and offset,
and the oil–gas coefficient correlating with potency.
How does the blood-gas partition coefficient determine the speed of induction?
The blood–gas partition coefficient is the single most important determinant of the
speed of induction and emergence with inhalational agents, and the reasoning,
though initially counterintuitive, is central to understanding inhalational
anaesthesia.
Induction depends on raising the partial pressure of the agent in the brain,
and since the brain equilibrates with arterial blood,
this depends on raising the partial pressure in the arterial blood and the alveoli
— for it is the partial pressure, not the total amount,
that determines anaesthetic effect and that equilibrates across the alveolar
membrane.
Now consider an agent that is highly soluble in blood,
with a high blood–gas coefficient: as it enters the blood, large amounts dissolve,
acting as a reservoir that absorbs the agent and holds down the partial pressure,
so that the alveolar and arterial partial pressure rises only slowly,
and induction is slow.
An agent of low blood solubility, with a low blood–gas coefficient,
dissolves little in the blood, so the blood partial pressure,
and hence the alveolar and brain partial pressure,
rises quickly to the inspired level, and induction is rapid.
Thus, paradoxically, the less soluble the agent in blood,
the faster the induction — because less of it is taken up into the blood reservoir
before the partial pressure rises.
This is why desflurane, sevoflurane and nitrous oxide, with low coefficients,
act quickly, and why agents may be chosen for rapid onset and offset.
The same applies in reverse to emergence.
So the blood–gas partition coefficient determines induction speed because a low
coefficient means little uptake into the blood reservoir,
so the partial pressure in alveoli,
blood and brain rises rapidly — making low-solubility agents the fastest in onset
and offset.
What is the effect of temperature on the solubility of a gas?
Temperature has an important and perhaps counterintuitive effect on the solubility
of gases, which is relevant both to the behaviour of blood gases and to the
interpretation of measurements.
The solubility of a gas in a liquid decreases as the temperature rises and
increases as the temperature falls — the opposite of the behaviour of most solids,
which become more soluble in warmer solvents.
The reason is that the dissolved gas molecules have more kinetic energy at higher
temperature and are more able to escape from the liquid into the gas phase,
so less remains dissolved. This is seen in everyday life as the bubbles forming in
water as it is warmed.
The clinical relevance is several-fold. In a hypothermic patient,
the increased solubility of gases means that more oxygen and carbon dioxide are
held in solution, and the partial pressure of a given content is correspondingly
lower; conversely warming reduces solubility.
This has consequences for the interpretation of blood gases measured at the
standard machine temperature of thirty-seven degrees when the patient is
hypothermic — the basis of the alpha-stat and pH-stat approaches to managing
acid–base during hypothermic bypass,
which differ in whether they correct for the patient's actual temperature.
The solubility of anaesthetic agents in blood also changes with temperature,
hypothermia increasing their solubility.
So the solubility of a gas falls with rising temperature and rises with falling
temperature, because warmer dissolved molecules escape more readily,
which raises gas solubility in hypothermia and underlies the alpha-stat and pH-stat
strategies for blood-gas management during hypothermic cardiopulmonary bypass.
Define diffusion and state Fick's law.
Diffusion is the passive movement of molecules from a region of higher
concentration to a region of lower concentration,
driven by their random thermal motion,
and it is described quantitatively by Fick's law,
which is fundamental to gas exchange and drug movement.
Diffusion arises because the molecules of a substance are in constant random
motion, and where they are more concentrated they tend, on average,
to move towards regions where they are less concentrated,
until they are evenly distributed; no energy is expended,
the process being driven by the concentration gradient and the molecules' own
kinetic energy.
Fick's law of diffusion states that the rate of diffusion of a substance across a
membrane is directly proportional to the surface area available for diffusion and
to the concentration gradient across the membrane,
and inversely proportional to the thickness of the membrane,
with a constant of proportionality, the diffusion coefficient,
that depends on the nature of the substance and the membrane.
For gases, the rate also depends on the solubility of the gas and inversely on the
square root of its molecular weight, the latter relationship being Graham's law,
so that lighter molecules diffuse faster.
The law identifies the factors that govern any diffusive process: a large area,
a steep gradient and a thin membrane all favour rapid diffusion.
So diffusion is the passive movement of molecules down a concentration gradient by
random thermal motion, and Fick's law states that the rate is proportional to the
area and the concentration gradient and inversely proportional to the membrane
thickness, modified for gases by solubility and molecular weight — identifying
area, gradient and thickness as the key determinants.
Apply Fick's law to gas exchange in the lung.
The diffusion of oxygen and carbon dioxide across the alveolar–capillary membrane
is a direct application of Fick's law,
and analysing it explains both normal gas exchange and the effects of disease.
The alveolar–capillary membrane is ideally suited to diffusion:
it presents an enormous surface area, of the order of seventy square metres,
and it is extremely thin, less than a micrometre across at its thinnest,
both features favouring rapid diffusion by Fick's law.
Oxygen diffuses from the alveolar gas, where its partial pressure is high,
across the membrane into the pulmonary capillary blood, where it is lower,
and carbon dioxide diffuses the other way.
Although carbon dioxide has a higher molecular weight than oxygen,
it diffuses about twenty times more readily across the membrane because it is far
more soluble, solubility being a major determinant for gases;
this is why carbon dioxide exchange is rarely diffusion-limited whereas oxygen may
be.
In health, the blood spends about three-quarters of a second in the pulmonary
capillary, ample time for oxygen to equilibrate fully with alveolar gas,
so oxygen exchange is normally perfusion-limited, not diffusion-limited.
Disease impairs diffusion by reducing the area, as in emphysema,
or thickening the membrane, as in pulmonary fibrosis or oedema,
reducing the rate by Fick's law and causing hypoxaemia,
especially on exertion when transit time shortens.
So gas exchange applies Fick's law:
the large area and thin membrane favour rapid diffusion;
carbon dioxide diffuses readily owing to its solubility;
oxygen exchange is normally perfusion-limited but becomes diffusion-limited when
disease reduces the area or thickens the membrane.
Explain diffusion hypoxia and the concentration and second gas effects.
Diffusion hypoxia, and the related concentration and second gas effects,
are clinical phenomena arising from the diffusion of nitrous oxide and its high
volume of uptake, and they are worth understanding both for their effect on
induction and for the precaution they demand at the end of anaesthesia.
Nitrous oxide is given in high concentrations and, being relatively insoluble,
is taken up in large volumes initially.
The concentration effect describes how the rapid uptake of a large volume of
nitrous oxide from the alveoli concentrates the remaining alveolar gases and draws
in more fresh gas, so that the alveolar concentration of nitrous oxide rises
towards the inspired concentration faster than would otherwise occur,
speeding its own onset.
The second gas effect is a corollary:
the same large-volume uptake and the inflow of fresh gas it causes also concentrate
and accelerate the uptake of a second agent,
such as a volatile agent given simultaneously, speeding its onset too.
Diffusion hypoxia, also called the Fink effect,
occurs at the end of anaesthesia when nitrous oxide is discontinued:
the large volume of nitrous oxide now leaving the blood and entering the alveoli
rapidly dilutes the alveolar gas, including oxygen,
lowering the alveolar oxygen partial pressure and risking hypoxaemia if the patient
breathes room air.
It is prevented by administering a high inspired oxygen concentration for a few
minutes after stopping nitrous oxide.
So the concentration and second gas effects arise from the large-volume uptake of
nitrous oxide speeding the onset of itself and of a co-administered agent,
while diffusion hypoxia is the reverse phenomenon at emergence,
the outpouring of nitrous oxide diluting alveolar oxygen — prevented by giving
supplemental oxygen after discontinuing nitrous oxide.
Define osmosis and osmotic pressure.
Osmosis is a special case of diffusion concerning the movement of the solvent,
usually water, across a semipermeable membrane,
and osmotic pressure is the force that drives it,
both being fundamental to the distribution of body fluids.
Osmosis is defined as the movement of water across a semipermeable membrane — one
that is permeable to water but not to the solute — from a region of lower solute
concentration to a region of higher solute concentration; that is,
water moves towards the more concentrated solution,
tending to dilute it and equalise the concentrations across the membrane.
The driving force can be expressed as the osmotic pressure,
defined as the pressure that would have to be applied to the more concentrated
solution to just prevent the net movement of water into it across the semipermeable
membrane.
The osmotic pressure of a solution depends, by van't Hoff's law,
on the number of osmotically active particles dissolved per unit volume,
and on the temperature, but not on the nature or size of the particles — so it is a
colligative property, determined by particle number alone.
This is why a substance that dissociates into several particles,
such as sodium chloride into sodium and chloride ions,
exerts an osmotic pressure proportional to the total number of particles produced.
Osmotic pressure governs the movement of water between the body fluid compartments
and across cell membranes.
So osmosis is the movement of water across a semipermeable membrane towards the
higher solute concentration, and osmotic pressure is the pressure needed to prevent
it, depending by van't Hoff's law on the number of dissolved particles — a
colligative property governing the distribution of body water.
Distinguish osmolarity, osmolality and tonicity, and explain oncotic pressure.
The terms osmolarity, osmolality, tonicity and oncotic pressure are related but
distinct, and precision in their use is important for understanding fluid therapy
and fluid shifts.
Osmolarity is the number of osmoles of solute per litre of solution,
expressed in osmoles or milliosmoles per litre;
osmolality is the number of osmoles per kilogram of solvent, expressed per kilogram.
The difference is the denominator — volume of solution versus mass of solvent — and
in dilute body fluids the two are nearly equal,
but osmolality is preferred in physiology because it is independent of temperature
and of the volume occupied by solutes.
The normal osmolality of body fluids is about two hundred and ninety milliosmoles
per kilogram.
Tonicity is a related but functional concept:
it refers to the effect of a solution on cell volume,
depending only on the solutes that cannot cross the cell membrane and so exert an
effective osmotic force across it.
Thus a solution of urea, which crosses cell membranes freely,
contributes to osmolality but not to tonicity, whereas sodium and glucose,
effectively excluded, determine tonicity.
Oncotic, or colloid osmotic, pressure is the osmotic pressure exerted specifically
by the large plasma proteins, chiefly albumin,
which cannot cross the capillary membrane; though small in absolute terms,
it is crucial because it acts across the capillary wall,
opposing the hydrostatic pressure and retaining fluid within the circulation,
a key term in the Starling equation.
So osmolarity is osmoles per litre of solution and osmolality osmoles per kilogram
of solvent; tonicity is the effective osmotic effect on cell volume from
non-penetrating solutes; and oncotic pressure is the colloid osmotic pressure of
plasma proteins across the capillary wall — distinctions central to fluid therapy.
Apply osmosis and oncotic pressure to fluid distribution and intravenous fluids.
The principles of osmosis, tonicity and oncotic pressure govern the distribution of
administered intravenous fluids between the body compartments and the movement of
water across capillary and cell membranes,
and applying them allows rational fluid therapy.
Body water is distributed between the intracellular and extracellular compartments,
the latter comprising the interstitial and intravascular spaces,
separated by the cell membrane and the capillary membrane respectively.
Water moves between these compartments according to osmotic and oncotic gradients.
The fate of an intravenous fluid depends on its composition.
Five per cent dextrose, once its glucose is metabolised, is effectively water,
which distributes across all compartments in proportion to their volumes,
so little remains in the circulation — making it ineffective for resuscitation but
useful for replacing pure water deficit.
Isotonic crystalloids, such as normal saline or balanced solutions,
distribute through the extracellular space but do not enter cells,
since they are isotonic, so a portion remains intravascular while most passes to
the interstitium.
Colloids, containing large molecules that exert an oncotic pressure and are
retained in the circulation longer,
expand the intravascular volume more efficiently per unit volume,
at least transiently.
Hypertonic solutions and osmotic agents such as mannitol draw water out of cells
and the interstitium into the circulation by osmosis,
used to reduce cerebral oedema and raised intracranial pressure.
The Starling forces govern the continuous exchange across the capillary.
So the distribution of intravenous fluids follows osmosis,
tonicity and oncotic pressure: dextrose distributes as water across all
compartments, crystalloids through the extracellular space,
colloids are retained intravascularly by oncotic pressure,
and osmotic agents such as mannitol draw water from cells — principles underlying
rational fluid choice.
What is the reflection coefficient, and why does it matter?
The reflection coefficient is a refinement of the simple picture of osmosis across
biological membranes, and it is important because real membranes are not perfectly
semipermeable, which modifies the osmotic forces they generate.
In the idealised account of osmosis, the membrane is perfectly semipermeable,
completely excluding the solute, so that the solute exerts its full theoretical
osmotic pressure across the membrane.
Real biological membranes, however,
are often partially permeable to a given solute, allowing some of it to cross;
such a solute then exerts only a fraction of its full osmotic pressure across the
membrane, because the leak dissipates part of the gradient.
The reflection coefficient is a number between zero and one that expresses this:
a value of one denotes a solute completely reflected by the membrane,
exerting its full osmotic effect, while a value of zero denotes a solute that
crosses freely and exerts no effective osmotic pressure across that membrane.
The capillary membrane, for example,
has a reflection coefficient close to one for the plasma proteins,
which it largely retains, so they exert nearly their full oncotic pressure,
but a low coefficient for small ions and solutes,
which cross readily and exert little effective osmotic force across it.
This concept enters the revised understanding of the Starling forces and the
behaviour of the glycocalyx, and it explains why the effective osmotic pressure of
a solute depends on the particular membrane.
So the reflection coefficient quantifies how completely a membrane excludes a
solute, between zero for free passage and one for complete reflection,
determining the fraction of its osmotic pressure that a solute actually exerts
across that membrane — important because real membranes are imperfectly
semipermeable, as in the retention of plasma proteins by the capillary wall.
How do diffusion and solubility govern the passage of drugs across membranes?
The passage of drugs across the body's membranes is governed largely by diffusion
and by the drug's solubility characteristics,
and understanding this explains drug absorption,
distribution and the crossing of important barriers.
Most drugs cross cell membranes by passive diffusion down their concentration
gradient, in accordance with Fick's law, so a large surface area,
a steep gradient and a thin barrier favour passage.
The key property determining whether a drug can cross the lipid cell membrane is
its lipid solubility: lipid-soluble drugs dissolve in and pass readily through the
lipid bilayer, whereas water-soluble and ionised drugs cross poorly.
This is complicated by ionisation, because many drugs are weak acids or bases
existing in equilibrium between an ionised, water-soluble form and an unionised,
lipid-soluble form, the proportion depending on the drug's dissociation constant
and the local pH.
Only the unionised fraction crosses the membrane readily,
so the pH of the environment, by determining the degree of ionisation,
influences the rate of passage — the basis of pH partitioning and ion trapping,
whereby a drug accumulates on the side of a membrane where it is more ionised,
as local anaesthetics may in acidic tissue, or drugs across the placenta.
Molecular size also matters, smaller molecules diffusing more readily.
These principles govern the absorption of drugs, their distribution into tissues,
and their crossing of the blood–brain and placental barriers.
So drugs cross membranes mainly by passive diffusion governed by Fick's law and by
lipid solubility, with ionisation — determined by the drug's dissociation constant
and the local pH — controlling the lipid-soluble unionised fraction available to
cross, the basis of pH partitioning and ion trapping at the placenta and in tissues.
Briefly describe the principles of dialysis as an application of diffusion and
osmosis.
Dialysis, the artificial removal of waste solutes and water from the blood,
is a direct clinical application of the principles of diffusion and osmosis,
and the anaesthetist encounters its principles in the management of renal failure
and in certain detoxification.
Dialysis brings the patient's blood into contact, across a semipermeable membrane,
with a dialysis fluid of controlled composition,
and relies on two main physical processes.
The first is diffusion: solutes that are present in higher concentration in the
blood, such as urea, potassium and other waste products,
diffuse down their concentration gradients across the membrane into the dialysis
fluid, which is formulated to contain little or none of them,
while desired substances such as bicarbonate can be made to diffuse the other way;
the rate follows Fick's law, favoured by a large membrane area,
a thin membrane and a maintained gradient,
the latter achieved by flowing fresh dialysate.
The second process is the removal of excess water,
achieved by ultrafiltration — applying a pressure gradient across the membrane to
drive water and small dissolved solutes through it by convection,
carrying solute with the water, a process called solvent drag.
Osmosis may also be used, as in peritoneal dialysis,
where a hypertonic dialysate draws water osmotically across the peritoneal
membrane. The balance of diffusion and convection differs between dialysis
modalities, the haemofiltration techniques relying more on convection.
So dialysis applies diffusion to remove waste solutes down their gradients across a
semipermeable membrane, ultrafiltration and convection to remove excess water with
solvent drag, and, in peritoneal dialysis,
osmosis to draw off water — the physical principles of diffusion and osmosis put to
therapeutic use.
Finally, draw together the relevance of solubility,
diffusion and osmosis to anaesthetic practice.
Drawing the station together, the related phenomena of solubility,
diffusion and osmosis underlie a remarkable range of anaesthetic physiology and
practice, from the uptake of our anaesthetic agents to the management of fluids,
gas exchange and drug behaviour.
Solubility, governed by Henry's law for gases and quantified by partition
coefficients for anaesthetic agents,
determines the carriage of respiratory gases and,
through the blood–gas coefficient, the speed of induction and recovery,
while the oil–gas coefficient correlates with potency,
and the temperature dependence of gas solubility underlies the alpha-stat and
pH-stat strategies in hypothermia.
Diffusion, governed by Fick's law with its dependence on area,
gradient and membrane thickness, underlies gas exchange across the
alveolar–capillary membrane, the diffusion limitation of disease,
the concentration and second gas effects, diffusion hypoxia,
and the passage of drugs across membranes by lipid solubility and pH partitioning.
Osmosis and osmotic pressure, depending by van't Hoff's law on particle number,
with the distinctions of osmolarity, osmolality,
tonicity and oncotic pressure and the refinement of the reflection coefficient,
govern the distribution of body water, the fate of intravenous fluids,
the Starling exchange across the capillary,
and the action of osmotic agents such as mannitol, and they underlie dialysis.
So solubility, diffusion and osmosis are not separate curiosities but interlinked
principles running through anaesthetic uptake, gas exchange,
pharmacology and fluid therapy — a foundation that repays thorough understanding.
State Graham's law and explain effusion and diffusion in relation to molecular
weight.
Graham's law describes how the rate at which a gas diffuses or effuses depends on
its molecular weight, and it complements Fick's law in accounting for the behaviour
of gases of different sizes.
The law states that the rate of diffusion, or of effusion,
of a gas is inversely proportional to the square root of its molecular weight,
so that lighter molecules move faster than heavier ones;
a gas of four times the molecular weight diffuses at half the rate.
The underlying reason is that at a given temperature all gas molecules have,
on average, the same kinetic energy,
so lighter molecules must move faster to possess that energy,
and their greater speed allows them to diffuse and to escape through small openings
more rapidly.
Effusion is the escape of a gas through a tiny orifice into a vacuum or
lower-pressure region, while diffusion is the spreading of one gas through another;
both follow the square-root relationship.
This law explains, for example, the rapid diffusion of light helium,
exploited in lung function testing and in helium–oxygen mixtures,
and the relative diffusion rates of respiratory gases,
though for gases dissolving in and crossing a liquid membrane, as in the lung,
solubility is usually the dominant factor and may outweigh the molecular-weight
effect — which is why carbon dioxide, though heavier than oxygen,
crosses the alveolar membrane faster owing to its much greater solubility.
So Graham's law states that the rate of diffusion or effusion of a gas is inversely
proportional to the square root of its molecular weight,
lighter molecules moving faster, which explains the rapid diffusion of helium,
while in the lung solubility often dominates molecular weight,
as for the readily diffusing carbon dioxide.
Explain the Starling forces governing fluid exchange across the capillary.
The exchange of fluid between the plasma and the interstitium across the capillary
wall is governed by the balance of hydrostatic and osmotic forces,
described by the Starling principle,
which integrates the concepts of pressure and oncotic pressure we have discussed.
The classical Starling hypothesis holds that the movement of fluid across the
capillary wall depends on the balance between two opposing pairs of forces.
The hydrostatic pressure within the capillary tends to push fluid out into the
interstitium, opposed by the usually small interstitial hydrostatic pressure.
The plasma oncotic, or colloid osmotic, pressure,
generated by the plasma proteins that the wall largely retains,
tends to draw fluid back into the capillary,
opposed by the small interstitial oncotic pressure.
The net filtration depends on the difference between these,
modified by the permeability of the capillary and by the reflection coefficient for
protein.
In the classical model, fluid is filtered out at the arterial end,
where capillary hydrostatic pressure is highest, and reabsorbed at the venular end,
where it has fallen below the oncotic pressure,
with the small excess returned by the lymphatics.
The revised understanding emphasises the endothelial glycocalyx layer as the true
semipermeable barrier and recognises that, in many capillaries,
there is little venular reabsorption,
filtration being balanced by lymphatic return — which has implications for fluid
therapy.
So the Starling forces governing capillary fluid exchange are the outward capillary
hydrostatic pressure and the inward plasma oncotic pressure,
modified by their interstitial counterparts,
permeability and the reflection coefficient,
with the glycocalyx now recognised as the key barrier — the balance determining
filtration and tissue fluid formation.
What is the Gibbs-Donnan effect?
The Gibbs–Donnan effect is a phenomenon affecting the distribution of diffusible
ions across a semipermeable membrane when a non-diffusible charged species is
present on one side, and it is relevant to the distribution of ions and to osmotic
relationships across biological membranes.
When a membrane separates two solutions and is permeable to small ions such as
sodium and chloride but impermeable to a large charged species,
such as the negatively charged plasma proteins,
the presence of that non-diffusible charge alters the equilibrium distribution of
the diffusible ions.
To maintain electrical neutrality and equilibrium,
the diffusible ions distribute unequally across the membrane:
the side containing the non-diffusible anion attracts a slightly higher
concentration of diffusible cations and a slightly lower concentration of
diffusible anions than the other side.
The result is a predictable unequal distribution of the small ions,
with the product of the diffusible ion concentrations being equal on the two sides
at equilibrium, and a small electrical potential and an additional osmotic effect
across the membrane.
In the body, the Gibbs–Donnan effect operates across the capillary wall and cell
membranes wherever impermeant proteins are present,
contributing to the slightly higher ion content and osmotic pressure on the
protein-containing side, which adds to the oncotic effect of the proteins
themselves in retaining fluid in the plasma.
It also subtly influences the resting distribution of ions.
So the Gibbs–Donnan effect is the unequal equilibrium distribution of diffusible
ions caused by a non-diffusible charged species such as plasma protein,
producing a predictable ion imbalance,
a small potential and an additional osmotic effect that augments the protein's
fluid-retaining action across capillary and cell membranes.
How is osmolality measured?
The measurement of osmolality is a useful clinical investigation,
and it is performed by exploiting one of the colligative properties of a solution —
those properties that depend on the number of dissolved particles — most commonly
the depression of the freezing point.
The principle rests on the fact that dissolving particles in a solvent changes
several of its properties in proportion to the number of particles present,
regardless of their nature: it lowers the freezing point, raises the boiling point,
lowers the saturated vapour pressure, and raises the osmotic pressure.
Because these changes are proportional to the particle concentration,
measuring any of them allows the osmolality to be determined.
The osmometer most commonly used measures the depression of the freezing point:
a solution of one osmole per kilogram of water freezes at a temperature about one
point eight six degrees below the freezing point of pure water,
so by accurately measuring how much the freezing point of the sample is depressed,
the osmometer calculates its osmolality.
The instrument supercools a small sample, induces freezing,
and measures the temperature at which freezing occurs.
An alternative type measures the reduction in saturated vapour pressure,
or the related dew point.
Measured osmolality can be compared with the calculated value,
estimated from the major solutes, the difference being the osmolar gap,
which is increased by unmeasured osmotically active substances such as alcohols,
of diagnostic value in poisoning.
So osmolality is measured by an osmometer exploiting a colligative property,
usually the depression of the freezing point — about one point eight six degrees
per osmole per kilogram — or sometimes vapour pressure,
and the measured value compared with the calculated osmolality gives the osmolar
gap, useful in detecting unmeasured solutes.
How do solubility and partition affect the uptake of volatile agents into tissues
and equipment?
The solubility and partition of volatile anaesthetic agents determine not only
their uptake into blood but their distribution into the various body tissues and
even their absorption by the components of the breathing system,
which influences the course of anaesthesia.
Just as the blood–gas partition coefficient governs uptake into blood,
each tissue has its own tissue–blood partition coefficient describing how the agent
distributes between that tissue and blood at equilibrium.
Tissues with a rich blood supply, such as the brain, heart,
liver and kidney — the vessel-rich group — equilibrate rapidly with arterial blood,
so the agent reaches them quickly, which is why anaesthesia is induced and
lightened promptly.
Muscle, with a lower blood flow, equilibrates more slowly.
Fat presents a special case: volatile agents are highly soluble in fat,
with a high fat–blood partition coefficient, but fat has a poor blood supply,
so it takes up the agent very slowly over hours,
acting as a large reservoir that prolongs recovery after long anaesthetics as the
agent slowly washes out.
This multi-compartment uptake explains the time course of induction,
maintenance and recovery.
Furthermore, volatile agents are soluble in the rubber and plastic components of
the breathing system and the soda lime,
which absorb some agent during use and release it later,
a minor effect that can slightly delay the change in delivered concentration and
cause a small residual output.
So tissue–blood partition coefficients govern the rate at which each tissue takes
up volatile agent — rapidly in the vessel-rich group, slowly in muscle,
and very slowly but extensively in the fat reservoir that prolongs recovery — while
solubility in circuit components causes minor absorption and later release of agent.
Thank you. A comprehensive and accomplished account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Henry's law: the amount of a gas dissolved in a liquid is proportional to
its partial pressure (at constant temperature) - underlying dissolved oxygen and
carbon dioxide in blood and decompression bubble formation;
gas solubility falls as temperature rises (hence higher solubility in hypothermia,
and the alpha-stat/pH-stat strategies).
Second, The blood-gas partition coefficient determines induction/emergence speed:
a LOW coefficient (insoluble agent, e.g.
desflurane, nitrous oxide) means little uptake into the blood reservoir,
so alveolar/brain partial pressure rises fast - giving rapid onset and offset;
the oil-gas coefficient correlates with potency.
Third, Fick's law: diffusion rate is proportional to area and concentration
gradient and inversely to membrane thickness (modified for gases by solubility and
molecular weight) - so the lung's huge thin alveolar-capillary membrane favours
exchange; carbon dioxide diffuses readily (high solubility) and oxygen exchange is
normally perfusion-limited but becomes diffusion-limited in disease.
Fourth, Nitrous oxide's large-volume uptake gives the concentration and second gas
effects (speeding onset), and its outpouring at emergence causes diffusion hypoxia
(Fink effect) - prevented by giving supplemental oxygen after stopping nitrous
oxide. 5.
Osmotic pressure depends (van't Hoff) on the NUMBER of particles;
distinguish osmolarity (per litre solution), osmolality (per kg solvent),
tonicity (effective osmotic effect on cells) and oncotic pressure (plasma proteins
across the capillary) - governing the distribution of IV fluids (dextrose as water,
crystalloid extracellular, colloid intravascular,
mannitol drawing water from cells), refined by the reflection coefficient.
Thank you. That concludes the station.